h2. Setup

Some house-cleaning here. We assume of course you have Git installed, (hopefully >= 1.7.0).

First thing to do is to setup your identity. This identifies you to other people who download the project.


<pre><code>
$ git config --global user.name "Your Name"
$ git config --global user.email your.email@example.com
</code></pre>


As a helpful step, you may want to set Git to use your favourite editor


<pre><code>
$ git config --global core.editor emacs
</code></pre>


h2. Starting your journey


First, clone this repository:

<pre><code>
$ git clone https://github.com/kuahyeow/git-workshop.git
Initialized empty Git repository in /home/kuahyeow/git-workshop/.git/
remote: Counting objects: 17, done.
remote: Compressing objects: 100% (11/11), done.
remote: Total 17 (delta 4), reused 0 (delta 0)
Receiving objects: 100% (17/17), done.
Resolving deltas: 100% (4/4), done.
</code></pre>

Once you have cloned your repository, you should now see a directory called @git-workshop@. This is your @working directory@

<pre><code>
$ cd git-workshop
$ ls
</code></pre>

For the curious, you should also see the @.git@ subdirectory. This is where all your repository's data and history is kept.

<pre><code>
$ ls -a .git
branches  config  description  HEAD  hooks  info  objects  refs
</code></pre>


h2. Adding new files

Now, let's try adding some files into the project. Create a couple of files. For example, I create two files named @bob.txt@ and @alice.txt@.

<pre>

In your working directory, create two files named alice.txt and bob.txt

</pre>

Let's use a mail analogy. 

In Git, you first add content to the @staging area@ by using @git add@. This is like putting the stuff you want to send into a cardboard box. You finalize the process and record it into the git index by using @git commit@. This is like sealing the box - it's now ready to send.

Let's add the files to the staging area

<pre><code>
$ git add alice.txt bob.txt
</code></pre>

You are now ready to commit. The @-m@ flag allows you to enter a message to go with the commit at the same time. 

<pre><code>
$ git commit -m "I am adding two new files"
[master 4e7c6cf] I am adding two new files
 0 files changed, 0 insertions(+), 0 deletions(-)
 create mode 100644 alice.txt
 create mode 100644 bob.txt
</code></pre>

h2. Let's see what just happened

We should now have a new commit. To see all the commits so far, use @git log@

<pre><code>
$ git log
</code></pre>

The log should show all commits listed from most recent first to least recent. You would see various information like the name of the author, the date it was commited, a commit SHA number, and the message for the commit. 

You should also see your most recent commit, where you added the two new files in the previous section. However git log does not show the files involved in each commit. To view more information about a commit, use @git show@.

<pre><code>
$ git show

commit 5a1fad96c8584b2c194c229de7e112e4c84e5089
Author: kuahyeow <kuahyeow@gmail.com>
Date:   Sun Jul 17 19:13:42 2011 +1200

    I am adding two new files

diff --git a/alice.txt b/alice.txt
new file mode 100644
index 0000000..e69de29
diff --git a/bob.txt b/bob.txt
new file mode 100644
index 0000000..e69de29
</code></pre>


h2. Adding more changes and backing out

In this section, we are going to add more changes, and try to recover from mistakes.

Be forewarned, this next step is going to be hard. We will need to add some content to alice.txt. 

<pre>
Open alice.txt and type in something, anything. 

e.g. Lorem ipsum Sed ut perspiciatis, unde omnis iste natus error sit voluptatem accusantium doloremque laudantium

Then save.

</pre>

So we have updated @alice.txt@ and we wish to commit it to our @repository@.

What did we change? A very useful command is @git diff@. This is very useful to see exactly what changes you have done. 

<pre><code>
$ git diff

diff --git a/alice.txt b/alice.txt
index e69de29..2aedcab 100644
--- a/alice.txt
+++ b/alice.txt
@@ -0,0 +1 @@
+Lorem ipsum Sed ut perspiciatis, unde omnis iste natus error sit voluptatem accusantium doloremque laudantium

</code></pre>


Now let's add our modified file to the staging area

<pre>

Add <b>alice.txt</b> to the staging area. (Ask for help if you are stumped)

</pre> 

<pre>

Now, check the <b>status</b> of <b>alice.txt</b>. Is it in the staging area now?

</pre>


Let's say we did not like putting Lorem ipsum into @alice.txt@. One advantage of a staging area is to enable us to back out before we commit - which is a bit harder to back out of. Remembering the mail analogy - it's easier to take mail out of the cardboard box before you seal it than after.

Here's how to back out of the staging area :

<pre><code>
$ git reset HEAD alice.txt

Unstaged changes after reset:
M	alice.txt

</code></pre>

Your staging area should now be empty. What's happened to the Lorem Ipsum changes? It's still there. We are now back to the state just before we added this file to staging area.

<pre>

What do we call this state?

</pre>

To undo your changes entirely, we use @git checkout@, like so:

<pre><code>

$ git checkout alice.txt

</code></pre>

You have now un-done your changes. Your file is now empty



h2. Branching

Most large code bases have at least two branches - a 'live' branch and a 'development' branch. The live branch is code which is OK to be deployed on to a website, or downloaded by customers. The development branch allows developers to work on features which might not be bug free. Only once everyone is happy with the development branch would it be merged with the live branch.

Creating a branch in Git is easy. The @git branch@ command, when used by itself, will list the branches you currently have

<pre><code>
$ git branch

* master
</code></pre>

The @*@ should indicate the current branch you are on, which is @master@.

If you wish to start another branch, use @git branch (new-branch-name)@ :

<pre><code>
$ git branch exp1
$ git branch
  exp1
* master
</code></pre>

The new branch is now created. Now let's work in that branch. To switch to the new branch:

<pre><code>
$ git checkout exp1

Switched to branch 'exp1'
</code></pre>

@git checkout (branch-name)@ is used to switch branches. 


Let's perform some commits now,

<pre><code>
$ echo 'some content' > test.txt
$ git add test.txt
$ git commit -m "Added experimental txt"
[exp1 1520634] Added experimental txt
 1 files changed, 1 insertions(+), 0 deletions(-)
 create mode 100644 test.txt
</code></pre>

Now, let's compare them to the master branch. Use @git diff@

<pre><code>
$ git diff master

diff --git a/test.txt b/test.txt
new file mode 100644
index 0000000..2ef267e
--- /dev/null
+++ b/test.txt
@@ -0,0 +1 @@
+some content
</pre></code>

Basically what the above output says is that @test.txt@ is present on the @exp1@ branch, but is absent on the @master@ branch.


Git is good enough to handle your files when you switch between branches. Switch back to the @master@ branch

<pre>

Switch back to the master branch (Hint: It's the same command we used to switch the the exp1 branch above)

</pre>

Now, where's our @test.txt@ file ?

<pre><code>
$ ls
README.textile	alice.txt	bob.txt		gamow.txt
</code></pre>

As you can see the new file you created in the other branch has disappeared. Not to worry, it is safely tucked away, and will re-appear when you switch back to that branch.

<pre>

Switch back to the exp1 branch, and check that the test.txt is now present.

</pre>


h2. Merging

We now try out merging. Eventually you will want to merge two branches together after the conclusion of work. 
@git merge@ allows you to do that. 

First, make sure you are on the @master@ branch.

<pre>

Switch to the master branch if you haven't already

</pre>

To merge the @exp1@ branch into @master@

<pre><code>
$ git merge exp1
Merge made by recursive.
 test.txt |    1 +
 1 files changed, 1 insertions(+), 0 deletions(-)
 create mode 100644 test.txt
</code></pre>

You always specify the branch you want to merge from, and you have to be in the branch you want merge into.

At this point, you can also try out @gitk@ to visualize the changes and how the two branches have merged

Git is pretty good at merging automagically, even when the same file is edited. There are however, some situations where the same line of code is edited there is no way a computer can figure out how to merge. 
This will trigger a conflict which you will have to fix. 

h2. Merge Conflicts

We now practise fixing merge conflicts. Recall that conflicts are caused by merges which affect the same block of code.

Here's a branch I prepared earlier. The branch is called @alpher@. Run the code below to set it up (don't worry if you can't understand it)
<pre><code>
$ git checkout alpher

Branch alpher set up to track remote branch alpher from origin.
Switched to a new branch 'alpher'
</code></pre>

You should now have a new branch called @alpher@. Try merging that branch into @master@ now and fix the ensuing conflict.

<pre>

Merge the alpher branch into master (as you did when you merged exp1 into master) (Ask for help if stumped)

</pre>


You should see a @conflict@ with the @gamow.txt@ file. This means that the same line of text was edited and committed on both the master branch and the alpher branch. The output below basically tells you the current situation

<pre><code>
 
Auto-merging gamow.txt
CONFLICT (content): Merge conflict in gamow.txt
Automatic merge failed; fix conflicts and then commit the result.

</code></pre>

If you open the @gamow.txt@ file, you will see something similar as below: 

<pre>

$ cat gamow.txt
<<<<<<< HEAD
It was eventually recognized that most of the heavy elements observed in the present universe are the result of stellar nucleosynthesis (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stellar_nucleosynthesis) in stars, a theory largely developed by Bethe.
=======

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stellar_nucleosynthesis
Stellar nucleosynthesis is the collective term for the nuclear reactions taking place in stars to build the nuclei of the elements heavier than hydrogen. Some small quantity of these reactions also occur on the stellar surface under various circumstances. For the creation of elements during the explosion of a star, the term supernova nucleosynthesis is used.
>>>>>>> alpher
</pre>

Git uses pretty much standard conflict resolution markers. The top part of the block, which is everything between @<<<<<< HEAD@ and @======@ is what was in your current branch.
The bottom half is the version that is present from the @alpher@ branch. To resolve the conflict, you either choose one side or merge them as you see fit.

For example, I might decide to choose the version from the @alpher@ branch. 

<pre>

Fix the merge conflict. Pick the text that you think is better (Ask for help if stumped)

</pre>

Once I have done that, I can then mark the conflict as fixed by using @git add@ and @git commit@. 

<pre><code>
$ git add gamow.txt
$ git commit -m "Fixed conflict"
[master f03b09c] Fixed conflict
</code></pre>

Congratulations. You have fixed the conflict. All is good in the world.

h2. Fin

You have learnt :

# Clone a repository
# Commit files
# Check status
# Check diff
# Undoing changes
# Branching and merging
# Fixing conflicts

h3. References and Further reading

I throughly recommend these resources to continue your Git practice:

* <a href="http://progit.org">http://progit.org</a> (buy the book at http://tinyurl.com/amazonprogit)
* <a href="http://gitref.org">http://gitref.org</a>
* <a href="http://www.kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/docs/everyday.html">http://www.kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/docs/everyday.html</a>



h2. Author

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 License
<a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/">http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/</a>
Author: Thong Kuah
Contributors: Nick Malcolm
